## A Comprehensive Categorization Framework for Interactive Fiction Games
# HONGYANG LIU
# Professor KELVIN SUNG

Interactive Fiction (IF) games are digital experiences that merge storytelling with interactive gameplay, allowing players to navigate and influence story-driven adventures. These games have evolved significantly, integrating advanced visual and interactive elements alongside traditional textual narratives, making them an intriguing area of study.  However, currently, there are few structured frameworks designed for the systemic classification of IF games and it can be challenging to analyze these games wholistically.
This thesis presents a comprehensive categorization framework for IF games, designed to facilitate systematic classification and analysis. Based on features derived from a human-computer interface, story genre, game mechanics, and business model, the framework supports the classification of IF games into distinct categories. This structured approach allows feature-based examination and facilitates the holistic analysis of IF games and their evolution.
Validation for the proposed framework involved three rounds of sampling and categorizing IF games. The first round sampled popular IF games developed based on well-established game engines to demonstrate the fundamental robustness of the framework. The second round sampled popular IF games over time for insights into potential trends as IF games continue to develop and evolve. The third round was based on popular IF game series to examine evolution of same type of game over time.
The three rounds of sampling and categorizing reveal potential patterns and trends that enhance our understanding of IF games. Key findings include the trends from text-only to image-based or even animation-based output, from single-defined to multiple-defined endings, from no or little towards more sophisticated support for stats and resource management, and the potential overlapping and merging of IF and action-adventure games.
These findings demonstrate that the proposed framework is an effective tool for systematic analysis that can offer valuable insights into the development and trends of IF games. Since classification involves subjectivity, future work should repeat the process based on stakeholders with distinct backgrounds, e.g., publishers, developers, and gamers. Additionally, the proposed framework is but a first step and should be continuously reviewed and refined.

